docs/tutorials/MULTI_PARTY_CONTRACT.md, before:

# Multi-Party Contract Tutorial

Create a contract where only Alice or Bob can make commits.

## Step 1: Create Contract & Identities

```bash
mkdir my-contract && cd my-contract

# Create the contract
modal contract create

# Create identities for Alice and Bob
modal id create --path alice.passfile
modal id create --path bob.passfile

# Get their IDs
ALICE=$(cat alice.passfile | jq -r '.id')
BOB=$(cat bob.passfile | jq -r '.id')
```

## Step 2: Set Up Users via State Directory

```bash
# Initialize state directory
modal c checkout

# Create the users directory and add IDs
mkdir -p state/users
echo "$ALICE" > state/users/alice.id
echo "$BOB" > state/users/bob.id

# Check status
modal c status
```

Output:
```
Changes in state/:
  + /users/alice.id
  + /users/bob.id

  Run 'modal c commit --all' to commit changes.
```

## Step 3: Commit the Users

```bash
modal c commit --all
```

## Step 4: Add Authorization Rule

```bash
# Get the current HEAD commit hash
HEAD=$(cat .contract/HEAD)

# Add a rule requiring signatures (temporal modal logic)
mkdir -p rules
cat > rules/auth.modality << EOF
export default rule {
  starting $HEAD
  formula {
    always must (
      signed_by(/users/alice.id) | signed_by(/users/bob.id)
    )
  }
}
EOF

# Commit the rule
modal c commit --all
```

## Step 5: Make Signed Changes

```bash
# Alice adds a message
echo "Hello from Alice" > state/data/message.text
modal c commit --all --sign alice.passfile

# Bob responds
echo "Hello from Bob" > state/data/response.text
modal c commit --all --sign bob.passfile
```

## Step 6: View Status & Log

```bash
modal c status
```
```
Contract Status
═══════════════

  Contract ID: 12D3KooW...
  Total commits: 5
  ✅ state/ matches committed state.
```

```bash
modal c log
```
```
Contract: 12D3KooW...
Commits: 5

commit abc123... 
Actions:
  post /data/response.text

commit def456...
Actions:
  post /data/message.text

commit 789abc...
Actions:
  post /rules/auth.json

commit bcd012...
Actions:
  post /users/alice.id
  post /users/bob.id

commit efg345...
Actions:
  genesis /
```

## Full Script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e

# Setup
rm -rf /tmp/alice-bob-contract
mkdir -p /tmp/alice-bob-contract && cd /tmp/alice-bob-contract

# Create contract
modal contract create

# Create identities
modal id create --path alice.passfile
modal id create --path bob.passfile
ALICE=$(cat alice.passfile | jq -r '.id')
BOB=$(cat bob.passfile | jq -r '.id')

echo "Alice: $ALICE"
echo "Bob: $BOB"

# Initialize state and add users
modal c checkout
mkdir -p state/users state/rules state/data
echo "$ALICE" > state/users/alice.id
echo "$BOB" > state/users/bob.id

# Commit users
modal c commit --all

# Add authorization rule (temporal modal logic)
HEAD=$(cat .contract/HEAD)
mkdir -p rules
cat > rules/auth.modality << EOF
export default rule {
  starting $HEAD
  formula {
    always must (
      signed_by(/users/alice.id) | signed_by(/users/bob.id)
    )
  }
}
EOF
modal c commit --all

# Alice sends a message (signed)
echo "Hello from Alice" > state/data/message.text
modal c commit --all --sign alice.passfile

# Bob responds (signed)
echo "Hello from Bob" > state/data/response.text
modal c commit --all --sign bob.passfile

# Show final state
echo ""
echo "=== Contract Status ==="
modal c status

echo ""
echo "=== Contract Log ==="
modal c log

echo ""
echo "=== State Directory ==="
find state -type f
```

## Directory Structure

```
my-contract/
├── .contract/           # Internal storage
│   ├── config.json
│   ├── commits/
│   └── HEAD
├── state/               # Working directory
│   ├── users/
│   │   ├── alice.id
│   │   └── bob.id
│   ├── rules/
│   │   └── auth.modality
│   └── data/
│       ├── message.text
│       └── response.text
├── alice.passfile
└── bob.passfile
```

## Workflow Summary

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `modal c checkout` | Populate state/ from commits |
| `modal c status` | Show contract info + state changes |
| `modal c diff` | Show only state changes |
| `modal c commit --all` | Commit all state changes |
| `modal c commit --all --sign X.passfile` | Commit with signature |
| `modal c log` | Show commit history |
| `modal c push` | Sync with network |

Commit message:

Auto-replace $COMMIT placeholder with commit hash in rules
When committing a rule with 'starting $COMMIT', the placeholder
is automatically replaced with the commit's hash.

docs/tutorials/MULTI_PARTY_CONTRACT.md, after:

# Multi-Party Contract Tutorial

Create a contract where only Alice or Bob can make commits.

## Step 1: Create Contract & Identities

```bash
mkdir my-contract && cd my-contract

# Create the contract
modal contract create

# Create identities for Alice and Bob
modal id create --path alice.passfile
modal id create --path bob.passfile

# Get their IDs
ALICE=$(cat alice.passfile | jq -r '.id')
BOB=$(cat bob.passfile | jq -r '.id')
```

## Step 2: Set Up Users via State Directory

```bash
# Initialize state directory
modal c checkout

# Create the users directory and add IDs
mkdir -p state/users
echo "$ALICE" > state/users/alice.id
echo "$BOB" > state/users/bob.id

# Check status
modal c status
```

Output:
```
Changes in state/:
  + /users/alice.id
  + /users/bob.id

  Run 'modal c commit --all' to commit changes.
```

## Step 3: Commit the Users

```bash
modal c commit --all
```

## Step 4: Add Authorization Rule

```bash
# Add a rule requiring signatures (temporal modal logic)
# $COMMIT is automatically replaced with this commit's hash
mkdir -p rules
cat > rules/auth.modality << 'EOF'
export default rule {
  starting $COMMIT
  formula {
    always must (
      signed_by(/users/alice.id) | signed_by(/users/bob.id)
    )
  }
}
EOF

# Commit the rule
modal c commit --all
```

## Step 5: Make Signed Changes

```bash
# Alice adds a message
echo "Hello from Alice" > state/data/message.text
modal c commit --all --sign alice.passfile

# Bob responds
echo "Hello from Bob" > state/data/response.text
modal c commit --all --sign bob.passfile
```

## Step 6: View Status & Log

```bash
modal c status
```
```
Contract Status
═══════════════

  Contract ID: 12D3KooW...
  Total commits: 5
  ✅ state/ matches committed state.
```

```bash
modal c log
```
```
Contract: 12D3KooW...
Commits: 5

commit abc123... 
Actions:
  post /data/response.text

commit def456...
Actions:
  post /data/message.text

commit 789abc...
Actions:
  post /rules/auth.json

commit bcd012...
Actions:
  post /users/alice.id
  post /users/bob.id

commit efg345...
Actions:
  genesis /
```

## Full Script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -e

# Setup
rm -rf /tmp/alice-bob-contract
mkdir -p /tmp/alice-bob-contract && cd /tmp/alice-bob-contract

# Create contract
modal contract create

# Create identities
modal id create --path alice.passfile
modal id create --path bob.passfile
ALICE=$(cat alice.passfile | jq -r '.id')
BOB=$(cat bob.passfile | jq -r '.id')

echo "Alice: $ALICE"
echo "Bob: $BOB"

# Initialize state and add users
modal c checkout
mkdir -p state/users state/rules state/data
echo "$ALICE" > state/users/alice.id
echo "$BOB" > state/users/bob.id

# Commit users
modal c commit --all

# Add authorization rule (temporal modal logic)
# $COMMIT is automatically replaced with the commit's hash
mkdir -p rules
cat > rules/auth.modality << 'EOF'
export default rule {
  starting $COMMIT
  formula {
    always must (
      signed_by(/users/alice.id) | signed_by(/users/bob.id)
    )
  }
}
EOF
modal c commit --all

# Alice sends a message (signed)
echo "Hello from Alice" > state/data/message.text
modal c commit --all --sign alice.passfile

# Bob responds (signed)
echo "Hello from Bob" > state/data/response.text
modal c commit --all --sign bob.passfile

# Show final state
echo ""
echo "=== Contract Status ==="
modal c status

echo ""
echo "=== Contract Log ==="
modal c log

echo ""
echo "=== State Directory ==="
find state -type f
```

## Directory Structure

```
my-contract/
├── .contract/           # Internal storage
│   ├── config.json
│   ├── commits/
│   └── HEAD
├── state/               # Working directory
│   ├── users/
│   │   ├── alice.id
│   │   └── bob.id
│   ├── rules/
│   │   └── auth.modality
│   └── data/
│       ├── message.text
│       └── response.text
├── alice.passfile
└── bob.passfile
```

## Workflow Summary

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `modal c checkout` | Populate state/ from commits |
| `modal c status` | Show contract info + state changes |
| `modal c diff` | Show only state changes |
| `modal c commit --all` | Commit all state changes |
| `modal c commit --all --sign X.passfile` | Commit with signature |
| `modal c log` | Show commit history |
| `modal c push` | Sync with network |
